SDL SQL blog: historization, incremantal with CDC (#534)
smart-data-lake/smart-data-lake: blog/2022-05-11-SDL-historization/2022-05-011-historization.md

> ---

Reviewer: File should be named 2022-05-11-historization.md isnstead of 2022-05-111-historization.md.

> ---

Reviewer: File should be named 2022-05-11-historization.md isnstead of 2022-05-111-historization.md.

Author: thanks for the catch

> title: Data historization of SQL sources

Reviewer: I suggest some more buzz-words in the title, e.g. "Incremental historization using CDC"

Author: good point. What about " Incremantal historization using CDC and Airbyte MSSQL"

description: Tracking Data Changes of MSSQL databases with and without CDC
slug: sdl-hist
authors:
  - name: Mandes Schönherr
    title: Dr.sc.nat.
    url: https://github.com/mand35
tags: [historization, MSSQL, incremental, CDC]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

In many cases datasets have no constant live. New data points are created, values changed and data expires. We are interested in keeping track of all these changes.

> This article first presents collecting data utilizing **JDBC** and **deduplication on the fly**. Then, a **Change Data Capture** (CDC) enabled table will be transfered and historized in the data lake using an **Airbyte connector**. Methods for reducing the computational and storage efforts are mentioned.

Reviewer: ``
```suggestion
This article first presents collecting data utilizing **JDBC** and **deduplication on the fly**. Then, a **Change Data Capture** (CDC) enabled (MS)SQL table will be transferred and historized in the data lake using the **Airbyte MS SQL connector** supporting CDC. Methods for reducing the computational and storage efforts are mentioned.
```

<!--truncate-->

> In the [getting-started -> part2 -> keeping historical data](../../docs/getting-started/part-2/historical-data) historization is already introduced briefly. Here, we go in slightly more detail and track data originating from an MS SQL database. For the sake of simplicity, the tools and systems are deployed in Podman containers, including SDL, MSSQL server, as well as the metastore and polynote. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [getting-started -> part2 -> keeping historical data](../../docs/getting-started/part-2/historical-data) historization is already introduced briefly. Here, we go in slightly more detail and track data originating from an MS SQL database. For the sake of simplicity, the tools and systems are deployed in Podman containers, including SDLB, MSSQL server, as well as the metastore and polynote. 
```

It should be noted that there are a duplicates in the dataset. In the first case, the *deduplication* will be performed when the data is ported into the data lake (see configuration below). The procedure for table creation and modification is described below. 

## Prerequisites

* Podman installation
* SDLB with metastore and Polynote by cloning the getting-started example: 
  ```Bash
  git clone https://github.com/smart-data-lake/getting-started.git SDL_sql
	cd SDL_sql
	unzip part2.additional-files.zip
  ```
* Utilizing JDBC to MS SQL server, SDLB required this additional dependency. Therefore, add the following dependency to the `pom.xml`:
	```xml
	<dependency>
		<groupId>com.microsoft.sqlserver</groupId>
		<artifactId>mssql-jdbc</artifactId>
		<version>10.2.0.jre11</version>
	</dependency>
	```
* build sdl-spark: `podman build -t sdl-spark .`
* build the SDLB objects: 
	```Bash
	mkdir .mvnrepo
	podman run -v ${PWD}:/mnt/project -v ${PWD}/.mvnrepo:/mnt/.mvnrepo maven:3.6.0-jdk-11-slim -- mvn -f /mnt/project/pom.xml "-Dmaven.repo.local=/mnt/.mvnrepo" package
	```

> * copy polynote notebook [sql_data_monitor.ipynb](sql_data_monitor.ipynb) for later inspection into the `polynote/notebook` directory

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* copy polynote notebook [sql_data_monitor.ipynb](sql_data_monitor.ipynb) for later inspection into the `polynote/notebooks` directory
```

:::warning

>   The notebook will only be editable if the permissions are changed to be writable by other users `chmod +w polynote/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb`

Reviewer: This only changes writable permission for the current user and not other users... i needed to do `chmod -R 777 polynote/notebooks`, otherwise Polynote could not create a swap-file in this directory.

>   The notebook will only be editable if the permissions are changed to be writable by other users `chmod +w polynote/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  The notebook will only be editable if the permissions are changed to be writable by other users `chmod +w polynote/notebooks/sql_data_monitor.ipynb`
```

:::

* script for creating table on the SQL server: [db_init_chess.sql](db_init_chess.sql) into the `config` directory
* script for modifying the table on the SQL server: [db_mod_chess.sql](db_mod_chess.sql) into the `config` directory
* a restart script [restart_databases.sh](restart_databases.sh) is provided to clean and restart from scratch, including: stopping the containers, cleaning databases, freshly starting the containers and initializing the SQL database 

## Prepare Source Database
* start the pod with the metastore and polynote: 
  ```Bash

>   podman-compose up

Reviewer: I needed `mkdir -p data/_metastore` before this works.

  ```
* start the MS SQL server: 
  ```Bash

>   podman run -d --pod sdl_sql --hostname mssqlserver --add-host mssqlserver:127.0.0.1 --name mssql -v ${PWD}/data:/data  -v ${PWD}/config:/config -e "ACCEPT_EULA=Y" -e "SA_PASSWORD=%abcd1234%" mcr.microsoft.com/mssql/server:2017-latest

Reviewer: My pod is named "getting-started".

Reviewer: I think it depends on the directory where you start podman-compose...
And i would leave it as "getting-started" because thats what is cloned by default. We should add a warning, and change "--pod sdl_sql" to "--pod getting-started" every where, wdyt?

Author: How? When cloning with the described:
`git clone https://github.com/smart-data-lake/getting-started.git SDL_sql` your directory schould be named SDL_sql and therewith also the pod sdl_sql. Did you checked out differently or did podman do something different in your case?

Reviewer: Ok, i reused an already existing clone of getting-started, didn't see you checked out into a specific directory. Should we add a warning for that as well?

Author: Ok. Fair enough. I added a Note box for it.

  ```
* initialize the database: 
  ```Bash

>   podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -i /config/db_init_chess.sql

Reviewer: data/chess.csv was missing. Can you add to copy this to the prerequisites chapter?

Author: Thanks for the hint, added in a9f3a831

  ```
* list the table: 
  ```Bash
  podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -Q "SELECT count(*) FROM foobar.dbo.chess"
  podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -Q "SELECT * FROM foobar.dbo.chess WHERE id = '079kHDqh'"
  ```
  This should report 20058 row and we see an example of duplicates.

> :::note

Reviewer: Should we move this note to the start of this chapter?

Author: My intention is: having the user run at least once the commands to understand how the SQL database is created and initialized and verify the functionality. If the restart script is introduced above, only this would be used.

Reviewer: Yes, ok for me.

  This could be shortened, by just calling the [`bash restart_databases.sh`](restart_databases.sh).
:::

## Define Workflow

> The SDLB configuration file [`config/chess.conf`](chess.conf) consists of global settings for the metastore, the connection, the data objects, and the actions. 

Reviewer: Should we note that it has to be copied to config folder?

### Spark Settings
For the metastore, the location, driver and access is defined. Further, the amount of tasks and partitions are limited, due to our reasonable small problem size.

```hocon
global {
  spark-options {
    "spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionURL" = "jdbc:derby://metastore:1527/db;create=true"
    "spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionDriverName" = "org.apache.derby.jdbc.ClientDriver"
    "spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionUserName" = "sa"
    "spark.hadoop.javax.jdo.option.ConnectionPassword" = "1234"
    "spark.databricks.delta.snapshotPartitions" = 2
    "spark.sql.shuffle.partitions" = 2
  }
}  
```

### Connection

> The connection to the local MS SQL server is specified using JDBC settings and clear text authentication specification. In practice, a more secure authentication mode should be selected, e.g. Keycloak or tokens. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The connection to the local MS SQL server is specified using JDBC settings and clear text authentication specification. In practice, a more secure authentication mode should be selected, e.g. injection by environment variables. 
```

```hocon
connections {
  localSql {
    type = JdbcTableConnection
    url = "jdbc:sqlserver://mssqlserver:1433;encrypt=true;trustServerCertificate=true"
    driver = com.microsoft.sqlserver.jdbc.SQLServerDriver
    authMode {
      type = BasicAuthMode
      userVariable = "CLEAR#sa"
      passwordVariable = "CLEAR#%abcd1234%"
    }
  }
}
```

### DataObjects

> In a first place, two dataObjects are defined. The `ext-chess` defining the external source (the table on the MS SQL server), using JDBC connection. The `int-chess` defines a delta lake table object as integration layer as targets for our injection/historization action. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a first place, two dataObjects are defined. The `ext-chess` defining the external source (the table on the MS SQL server), using JDBC connection. The `int-chess` defines a delta lake table object as integration layer as targets for our ingestion/historization action. 
```

```hocon
dataObjects {
  ext-chess {
    type = JdbcTableDataObject
    connectionId = localSql
    table = {
      name = "dbo.chess"
      db = "foobar"
    }
  }
  int-chess {
    type = DeltaLakeTableDataObject
    path = "~{id}"
    table {
      db = "default"
      name = "int_chess"
      primaryKey = [id]
    }
  }
  #...
}
```

### Actions

> The `histData` action specifies the copy and historization of data, by setting the type **HistorizeAction**. Therewith, the incoming data will be joined with the existing data. Each data point gets two additional values: **dl_ts_captured** (time the data is captured in the data lake) and **dl_ts_delimited** (time of invalidation). In case of a data record change, the original row gets invalidated (with the current time) and a new row is added with the current time as capturing value. As long as the data point is active and the latest value, **dl_ts_delimited** is set to max date `9999-12-31 23:59:59.999999`. After merging the incoming data with the existing table, by default, the resulting table will overwrite the existing data lake table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `histData` action specifies the copy and historization of data, by setting the type **HistorizeAction**. Therewith, the incoming data will be joined with the existing data. Each data point gets two additional values: **dl_ts_captured** (time the data is captured in the data lake) and **dl_ts_delimited** (time of invalidation). In case of a data record change, the original row gets invalidated (with the current time) and a new row is added with the current time as capturing value. As long as the data point is active the latest records **dl_ts_delimited** is set to max date `9999-12-31 23:59:59.999999`.
```

> The default HistorizationAction compares all new data with all the exising data, row by row **AND** column by column. Further, the complete joined table is re-written to the data lake. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default HistorizationAction algorithm compares all new data with all the existing data, row by row **AND** column by column. Further, the complete joined table is re-written to the data lake. 
```

> Smart Data Lake Builder provides a merge optimization for transactional database formats. By selecting `mergeModeEnable = true` the resulting table gets another column with `dl_hash`. This hash is used to compare rows much more efficiently. Not every column need to be compared, only the hash. Further, already existing rows (identified by the hash), do not need to be re-written. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For DataObjects supporting transactions HistorizeAction provides an algorithm using a merge operation to do the historization. By selecting `mergeModeEnable = true` the resulting table gets another column with `dl_hash`. This hash is used to compare rows much more efficiently. Not every column need to be compared, only the hash. Further, already existing rows (identified by the hash), do not need to be re-written. The merge operation applies only the needed inserts and updates to the output DataObject.
```

> Furthermore, a *transformer* is added to deduplicate the data, which has duplicated rows with slightly different game times. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, a *transformer* needs to be added to deduplicate the input data, which has duplicated rows with slightly different game times. This is needed as HistorizationAction expects the input to be unique over the primary key of the output DataObject.
```

Author: I could not commit your suggestion, but added it seperately. Thanks for the hint.

```hocon
actions {
  histData {
    type = HistorizeAction
    mergeModeEnable = true
    inputId = ext-chess
    outputId = int-chess
    transformers = [{
      type = ScalaCodeDfTransformer
      code = """
        import org.apache.spark.sql.{DataFrame, SparkSession}
        (session:SparkSession, options:Map[String, String], df:DataFrame, dataObjectId:String) => {
          import session.implicits._
          df.dropDuplicates(Seq("id"))
        }
      """
   }]
   metadata {
      feed = download
    }
  }
  #...
}
```

The full configuration looks like [chess.conf](chess.conf). Note that there are already further dataObjects and actions defined, described and used later. 

## Run

> The Pod with metastore, polynote and the "external" SQL server should already being running. Now the SDLB container is launched within the same POD and the action histData injects the data into the data lake:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Pod with metastore, polynote and the "external" SQL server should already being running. Now the SDLB container is launched within the same POD and the action histData ingests the data into the data lake:
```

```Bash
podman run --hostname localhost -e SPARK_LOCAL_HOSTNAME=localhost --rm --pod sdl_sql -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/target:/mnt/lib -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-spark --config /mnt/config --feed-sel ids:histData
```

> The data can be inspected using the Polynote notebook (`chessData.ipynb` downloaded above), which can be launched using [Polynote (click here)](http://localhost:8192/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The data can be inspected using the Polynote notebook (`sql_data_monitor.ipynb` downloaded above), which can be launched using [Polynote (click here)](http://localhost:8192/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb). 
```

Now, let's assume a change in the source database. Here the `victory_status` `outoftime` is renamed to `overtime`. Furthermore one entry is deleted. Run script using:

```Bash
podman exec -it mssql /opt/mssql-tools/bin/sqlcmd -S mssqlserver -U sa -P '%abcd1234%' -i /config/db_mod_chess.sql
```

> Note: 1680 rows were changed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: 1680 rows were changed + 1 row deleted.
```

Furthermore, the data lake gets updated using the same command as above:
```Bash
podman run --hostname localhost -e SPARK_LOCAL_HOSTNAME=localhost --rm --pod sdl_sql -v ${PWD}/data:/mnt/data -v ${PWD}/target:/mnt/lib -v ${PWD}/config:/mnt/config sdl-spark --config /mnt/config --feed-sel ids:histData
```

> In the [Polynote (click here)](http://localhost:8192/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb) sql_data_monitor.ipynb, the data lake table can be inspected again. The The table and its additional columns are presented, as well as the original and updated rows for a modified row (*id = QQ3iIM2V*) and the deleted row (*id = 009mKOEz*).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the [Polynote (click here)](http://localhost:8192/notebook/sql_data_monitor.ipynb) sql_data_monitor.ipynb, the data lake table can be inspected again. The table and its additional columns are presented, as well as the original and updated rows for a modified row (*id = QQ3iIM2V*) and the deleted row (*id = 009mKOEz*).
```

![polynote example output](historization_res.png)

## Change Data Capture

So far the whole table is collected and compared with the existing data lake table. 

> Various databases support Change Data Capture (CDC). Which already keeps track of changes similar to the above presented historization feature of SDL. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Various databases support Change Data Capture (CDC). CDC already keeps track of changes similar to the comparision done by the historization feature of SDL. 
```

> this can be utilized to only gathering database updates. Thus the amount of transferred and compared data can be significantly reduced. Therewith, only data changed (created, modified, or deleted) since the last syncronisation will be send. Therefore, a status is attached to the successful stream. This **state** is handled in SDLB. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
this can be used to optimize performance of the historiation feature, gathering only database updates, reducing the amount of transferred and compared significantly. Therewith, only data changed (created, modified, or deleted) since the last synchronisation will be read from the database. It needs the status of the last synchronistation to be attached to the successful stream. This **state** is handled in SDLB. 
```

> In the following, an example is presented utilizing the MS SQL server CDC feature. Since the implemented JDBC connector cannot handle CDC data, an Airbyte connector is utilized. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the following, an example is presented utilizing the MS SQL server CDC feature. Since the implemented JDBC connector cannot handle CDC data, an Airbyte connector is utilized, see [Airbyte CDC](https://docs.airbyte.com/understanding-airbyte/cdc/) for details.
```
